---
title: Hosting Web Applications
descr: Hosting web applications is complex. Learn what goes into hosting web applications of any language.
---

<!--

Hosting web applications can be complex.

1. Web Server - Acts as a Proxy
2. Gateway - Translates request from web server into web application
3. Application - Our code which takes a request and responds to it

PHP - PHP is different, in Apache it acted like a static file. 
      With PHP-FPM, it's closer to the more common scheme,
      which is why PHP developers sometimes 

To host a web application, a web server can accept an HTTP request and pass it (proxy it) off to a "gateway". The gateway handles converting the request into something an application can understand.

These gateways are various implementations and flavors of a "CGI"s - a [Common Gateway Interfaces](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Gateway_Interface).

For example, many Python applications use the [uWSGI](http://wsgi.readthedocs.org/en/latest/) gateway. Apache will "proxy" a request to the gateway. In turn, the uWSGI gateway passes the request to the Python application.

PHP, when not directly loaded by Apache, can use the PHP-FPM gateway. FPM is an implementation of the [FastCGI](http://www.fastcgi.com/drupal/) gateway, which is a very common protocol.

Apache can also proxy to web applications over HTTP. This is popular when proxying requests to applications listening on HTTP. NodeJS and Golang are two languages that can listen for HTTP connections directly.

Gunicorn and Unicorn are two popular gateways which can communicate over HTTP as well. These can be used to serve Python and Ruby applications, respectively.

T> Note that gateways are commonly tied to specific languages, but some are not!


PHP:
Before we talk about commonly used gateways, let's discuss the glaring exception to the rule. PHP pages and applications are commonly loaded and parsed *directly* by Apache.

In this setup, Apache does not send PHP requests off to a gateway. Instead, Apache uses a PHP module to parse PHP requests directly. This allows PHP files to be used seamlessly alongside static web files.

I> Apache's `mod_php` makes using PHP extremely easy. It's commonly believed that this ease of use made PHP so successful. It is still commonly used.

Running the PHP module in Apache is as simple as installing Apache's `mod_php`. In Ubuntu, the package for that is "libapache2-mod-php5":
-->

Web frameworks of all languages have good development environments. These usually include a way to run a "development only" web service.

Things get more complicated when we want to put an application online. We can't just use run `python app.py` or `php -S 0.0.0.0:80` on a server used for real traffic.

This article will cover what goes into hosting a web application on a real server.

> A "real server" could be a remote development, staging, or production machine.

## Three Actors

Hosting a web application requires the orchestration of three actors:

1. The Application
2. The Gateway
3. The Web Server

### The Application & HTTP Interfaces

Web Applications are coded with a framework or libraries. These typically have tooling for handling web requests.

Libraries created to accept and translate HTTP requests are refered to as HTTP Interfaces.

For example, Python has the WSGI specification. A popular implementation of WSGI includes Werkzeug. This is a Python library which can accept WSGI-compliant web requests and pass them to an application.

Similiarly, Ruby has Rack. Rack is a specification *and* library that can accept requests of many formats and pass them to an application.

There are examples of such HTTP interfaces in most languages. PHP, notably, is lacking such a specification and middleware. However, there are talks of PHP-FIG defining such an interface in [PSR-7](https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/proposed/http-message.md).

Many newer languages include HTTP interfaces as part of their standard library.NodeJS and Golang are two examples which can listen for HTTP requests "out of the box".

In any case, web applications must incorporate a way to accept web requests and return valid responses.

<!--
1. We code applications
2. Frameworks give us tools to define routes and respond to them
3. We usually can access HTTP request related information
4. Requests to the web server get set to a gateway which in turn send a request into our application.
5. Responses from our application flow the opposite direction
6. Generally our code is an abstraction of HTTP concerns (framework) and business logic conerns (our code)
-->

### The Gateway

Gateways sit between a web server (Apache, Nginx) and a web application. They typically accept requests from a web server and translate the request to one or more processes of a running web application.

The exact definition of a gateway is a fluid. Unfortunately, gateways don't label themselves as such. Some call themselves HTTP servers. Some consider themselves to be process managers. Others are more of a platform, supporting multiple use cases, protocols, and programming languages.

It might be useful to describe what gateways do rather than pin down an exact definition. Some common functionality of gateways include:

1. Listen for requests (HTTP, FastCGI, uWSGI and more)
2. Translate requests to application code
2. Spawn multiple processes and/or threads of applications
3. Monitor spawned processes
3. Load balance requests between processes
4. Reporting/logging

Many gateways can accept HTTP requests directly. uWSGI, Gunicorn, and Unicorn are examples of such gateways.

> While Gateways can accept HTTP requests, they still usually sit behind a web server.

Othere protocols are also often supported. For example, uWSGI will accept HTTP, FastCGI and uwsgi (lowercase, the protocol) requests.

> Don't confuse Python's [PEP 3333 (WSGI) specification](http://legacy.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3333/) with uWSGI's protocol "[uwsgi](http://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.org/en/latest/Protocol.html)". This web stuff is fun.

PHP-FPM, the gateway for PHP, is an implementation of FastCGI. It will listen for FastCGI requests only.

No matter what protocol is used to accept requests, these gateways can speak a web applications' "language". They will translate a web request to application code.

uWSGI or Gunicorn will send requests to a Python application which uses Werkzeug (or any WSGI implementation) to interpret the request.

Unicorn or other Ruby gateways will send requests to a Ruby application using Rack to interpret the request.

The following Python gateways will speak WSGI:

* Gunicorn
* Tornado
* Gevent
* Twisted Web
* uWSGI

The following Ruby gateways will speak to Rack applications:

* Unicorn
* Phusion Passenger
* Thin
* Puma

PHP is, of course, special:

* Apache's PHP module can be used to run PHP. This skips over the concept of a gateway, loading in PHP directly.
* PHP-FPM is *the* gateway to use for running PHP. It uses FastCGI.
* HHVM - HHVM includes a FastCGI implementation. It acts much like PHP-FPM.

<!--
1. Sites between Application and Web Server
2. Web Server sends request to Gateway, Gateway Translates to Web application
3. Implementations of CGI
    - CGI, etc, but commonly:
    - FastCGI
    - WSGI
    - (HTTP, too!)
4. Code often has libraries to communicate as needed (WSGI for Python, PHP gets GLOBALS filled, Ruby??)
5. Gateway commonly controls application processes, threads if applicable. Monitors application processes if long-running.
-->

I mentioned above that some languages include HTTP interfaces in their standard library. Applications built in such languages *can* skip gateways. In that scenario, a web server will send HTTP requests directly to the application.

Such applications can still benefit from the use of a gateway. For example, a NodeJS application will run as a single process only. While NodeJS happens to run as a single-process very efficiently, you may want to use additional processes on a multi-core machine. A gateway such as [PM2](https://github.com/Unitech/pm2) could managae multiple processes, allowing for more concurrent application requests to be handled.

### The Web Server

The web server is something we're all probably pretty familiar with. They excel at serving requested files, but usually serve other purposes as well. One of these purposes is acting as a (reverse) proxy.

1. Accepts request
2. If matches parameters, send request to application
3. Send request [either HTTP, FastCGI, (u)WSGI] to gateway
4. Gateway interprets for application code, returns response
5. Web Server takes care of all HTTP concerns, except for direct application responses (generated HTML, API responses).

### Everything is Supervised

Package managers usually take care of this, but not always. Everything is a process that needs supervision - Web Server, Gateway and Application Processes. Typically we're concerned about server and gateway (gateway takes care of application). NodeJS/Golang apps might also need supervision.

* Upstart
* Systemd
* Supervisord
* Circus

### PHP is Special

PHP confuses developers who don't familiarize themselves with other languages. It behaves like a static file in the typical Apache setup. With Nginx (or Apache with FastCGI) there's more setup, but in the end it still behaves like a file - put up a PHP file, go to it in the browser.

All other languages do **not** behave like this. PHP may be the most popular in part because of this difference. In any case, this is a sticky point when trying out other languages. We not only have to learn new syntaxes and ideas, but then are hit in the face with the question of how to host applications!

> Note we didn't cover JVM-based languages (TomCat, Jetty gateways) here. Outside of my experience.







